restaurant style masala dosa recipe : crisp rice & lentil crepes stuffed with spiced potato masala.
author: dassana
recipe type: breakfast, snacks
cuisine: south indian
serves: 4 to 5
ingredients (measuring cup used, 1 cup = 250 ml)
Ingredients for the dosa batter:
330 grams or 1.5 cups parboiled rice/ukda chawal/sela chawal
125 grams urad dal or ½ cup husked whole or split black lentils
35 grams thick poha or ¼ cup thick poha/flattened rice
1 tablespoon chana dal
20 methi seeds/fenugreek seeds
1 cup water for soaking urad dal
2 cups water for soaking rice
1 cup water for grinding rice & poha
½ cup water for grinding dal
½ teaspoon rock salt or add as required
ingredients for the potato masala:
300 grams potatoes or 4 medium sized potatoes or 2 cups boiled & chopped or crumbled potatoes
2 tablespoons oil
½ teaspoon mustard seeds/rai
1 tablespoon chana dal soaked in ¼ cup hot water for 30 minutes.
150 grams onions or 2 medium to large onions, thinly sliced or 1.25 cups thinly sliced onions
1 inch ginger, finely chopped or 1 teaspoon finely chopped ginger
8 to 10 curry leaves/kadi patta
1 green chilli, chopped
¼ teaspoon turmeric powder/haldi
a pinch of asafoetida/hing
½ cup of water
3 tablespoons chopped coriander leaves/dhania patta
8 to 9 cashews/kaju, optional
¼ teaspoon sugar, optional
salt as required
how to make the recipe:
soaking rice & lentils:
first take all the ingredients in bowls. take rice and poha in separate bowls. take the lentils and methi seeds in one bowl.
rinse the lentils and methi seeds a couple of times. then soak them in 1 cup water for 4 to 5 hours.
rinse the rice a couple of times and keep aside.
rinse poha once or twice and then add to the rice.
pour 2 cups water. stir and soak both rice and poha together for 4 to 5 hours.
grinding dosa batter:
before grinding, strain the water from the soaked lentils and keep it for grinding urad dal.
add the lentils in the grinder jar. also add ½ cup of the soaked and strained water to the dal.
grind the urad dal, chana dal and methi seeds till you get a batter which is light and fluffy. the urad dal has to be ground really well, so that the batter ferments well.
remove the batter in a bowl or pan with a spatula.
strain the rice well. then in the same grinder, add the soaked rice and 1 cup fresh water. you can grind rice in one batch or in two to three batches. this will depend on the size of the grinder jar. i ground in one batch and added 1 cup water for grinding. you can even add ¾ cup water while grinding. addition of water will depend on the quality of rice.
grind the rice till you get a fine grainy consistency in it. the rice batter should have a fine rawa like consistency.
now pour the batter in the same pan or bowl containing the urad dal batter.
add ½ teaspoon rock salt or add as per taste.
mix the salt very well with the batter. also mix both the batters very well. cover and keep aside to ferment for 8 to 9 hours. you can keep batter to ferment for less or more time and this will depend on the temperature conditions in your city.
preparing the potato masala:
first rinse and then boil 4 medium sized potatoes in 2 cups water for 5 to 6 whistles in a pressure cooker. you can also boil potatoes in a pan. the potatoes have to be completely cooked
when the potaoes are cooking, soak the chana dal in hot water for 30 minutes. then drain the chana dal and keep aside.
when the pressure settles down on its own in the cooker, remove the lid. drain the potatoes and let them become warm. then peel them and chop them. also slice the onions and chop the green chilies, ginger and coriander leaves.
heat oil or ghee. fry cashews and keep aside. this step of frying cashews is optional.
lower the flame and add mustard seeds and let them splutter. then add the chana dal.
saute the chana dal for 2 to 3 minutes on a low flame or till they turn light golden or golden. now add the sliced onions, curry leaves, green chilies and ginger.
saute the onions till they soften and turn translucent.
add the turmeric powder and asafoetida. mix very well.
again mix well and simmer for 2 to 3 minutes.
next add the boiled chopped potatoes and mix very well.
season with salt. also add ¼ teaspoon sugar for a slight sweet taste.
simmer on a low flame for 3 to 4 minutes stirring occasionally.
switch off the flame and then add chopped coriander leaves.
stir and keep the potato masala aside.
preparing masala dosa:
lightly stir the batter, before you begin to make dosa. you will also see tiny air pockets in the batter
heat a cast iron pan or a flat non-stick pan. the pan should be medium hot. smear some oil if using an iron pan or griddle. don't smear oil on a non stick pan, as then you won't be able to spread the dosa batter.
keep the flame to a low, while spreading dosa batter.
spread the dosa batter in a circular way on the pan.
on a medium flame, cook the dosa.
sprinkle some oil on top and edges
cover the dosa with a lid and let it cook.
cook the dosa till its base becomes golden and crisp.
when you see the base has become golden, place a portion of the potato masala on the dosa. you can spread it a bit if you want.
now fold the dosa and serve.
serve crisp restaurant style masala dosa hot with coconut chutney and sambar
notes
- to get golden brown dosa, the pan should be hot. but the flip side is that if the pan is very hot, then you cannot spread the dosa batter nicely. either sprinkle water on the pan and then wipe it. this brings down the temperature of the pan. do this method on a cast iron pan. don't do this on a non stick pan. it might affect the non stick coating.
- if using a non stick pan than as soon as one dosa is done, reduce the flame. spread the dosa batter on the pan. now increase the flame and let the dosa cook.
- you can add ½ teaspoon cumin seeds while tempering.